# Command Line Usage

Once installed, `portray` exposes a simple command line utility for generating documentation.

To verify the tool is installed correctly, run `portray` from the command line and you should be given the available commands and the version of portray installed.
To get help for any individual subcommand run `portray SUBCOMMAND --help`:

<script id="asciicast-lcOTpO7GDNKv2NDBQLfQ1WszM" src="https://asciinema.org/a/lcOTpO7GDNKv2NDBQLfQ1WszM.js" async></script>

## Serving Documentation Locally

Before you push documentation out publicly, it's a good idea to test it locally and ensure it looks as desired.

Running `portray server` will generate a new static website for your project in a temporary directory and start a local server to allow you to browse it (at localhost:8000 by default).

<script id="asciicast-264247" src="https://asciinema.org/a/264247.js" async></script>

Running `portray in_browser` will do the same as `portray server` but also open up the generated website in your environments default web browser for you.

Both commands take an optional `--port` and `--host` argument.

!!! tip
    `portray` does its best to auto determine package modules in order to generate documentation. It does this by looking at `pyproject.toml` and your directory name.
    If it can't auto determine the Python modules used by your project, you can set them manually in your `pyproject.toml` file:

        [tool.portray]
        modules = ["portray"]

    Finally, portray pulls .md files from the root of your project and one dedicated documentation directory (defaulting to `docs`) by default.
    You can change the directory where docs are located by setting the `tool.portray.docs_dir` setting in `pyproject.toml`.

## Outputting Documentation Locally

You can also output `portray`'s generated documentation to a local directory.
To do so run `portray as_html`:

<script id="asciicast-264248" src="https://asciinema.org/a/264248.js" async></script>

By default the generated documentation is outputted into a `site` subdirectory.
If this directory exists for any reason, including previous documentation generation,
the command will fail. Passing in `--overwrite` will delete any existing directory
before output to ensure the command passes. You can change the output directory using `-o DIRECTORY`.

## Pushing Documentation to GitHub Pages

If you are using GitHub Pages to share your generated documentation you can use `portray on_github_pages` to automate the process:

<script id="asciicast-264249" src="https://asciinema.org/a/264249.js" async></script>

## Verifying Project Configuration

You can verify the configuration auto determined by `portray` using `portray project_configuration` in the root of your project:

<script id="asciicast-264250" src="https://asciinema.org/a/264250.js" async></script>

If anything seems incorrect, or you would want to modify any values, you can override any config option by setting it in the `[tool.portray]` section of your `pyproject.toml` file.
